docs: document TS custom events typings (#98)
vaadin/docs: articles/fusion/advanced/fusion-advanced-components-definitions.asciidoc

layout: page
---

= TypeScript Definitions of Components

> Vaadin components come with TypeScript definitions helping to use web components in TypeScript views.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[role="com.vaadin:vaadin@V17"]#Vaadin components come with TypeScript definitions# helping to use web components in TypeScript views.
```

The type definitions are `d.ts` files generated every time when new release is published to npm.

> Support for TypeScript definitions is added in Vaadin 17. In most of cases, it does not require any changes to the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most of cases, TypeScript support does not require any changes to the code.
```

Avoid having explicit mentions about Vaadin versions in the content – _write content with the mindset that a feature has always been in the product and will be there forever_. Use the versioning badges to indicate when a certain feature has been added or deprecated.

Reviewer: As a side note, it would be good to give some pointers about the cases where it could require changes to the code. Now the reader is left with a question, that will I need to make changes to my code?

> At the same time, using proper types for the web components helps to make the client side views more reliable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the same time, using proper types for the web components helps making the client side views more reliable.
```

> Depending on the IDE you use, TypeScript definitions can also give additional benefits like better code completion and auto import.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the IDE you use, TypeScript definitions can also enable better code completion and auto import.
```

If you are using Visual Studio Code, we recommend to install
https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=runem.lit-plugin[lit-plugin] which provides

> syntax highlighting and type checking support for LitElement templates. You can also use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
syntax highlighting and type checking support for LitElement templates. 
You can also use
```

https://www.npmjs.com/package/lit-analyzer[lit-analyzer] CLI tool by the same author for type checking.

== Importing Type Declarations [[importing-type-declarations]]

Every TypeScript definition file exports type declarations, which describe the public API provided by the web component.
To use the type declarations in your client side views, you need to
import them using https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/release-notes/typescript-3-8.html#type-only-imports-and-exports[type-only import syntax]:

> [source, typescript]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, TypeScript]
```

Prefer writing the language as it should appear in the content.

----
import type { DialogElement } from '@vaadin/vaadin-dialog';
----

The type declarations are only used by the TypeScript compiler to statically analyze the code and collect information about types.

> They are removed during `webpack` compilation step and will not end up in the resulting JavaScript bundle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are removed during `webpack` compilation step and do not end up in the resulting JavaScript bundle.
```

== Using Type Declarations [[using-type-declarations]]

In some cases you might need to get a reference to the web component, and use it to set properties or call methods.

> Below you will find examples of how to improve developer experience in such cases by applying proper types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples show how to improve the developer experience in such cases by applying proper types.
```

=== Query Decorator [[query-decorator]]

The suggested way of storing a reference in LitElement based view is `@query` decorator.
When using it, you need to provide a correct type for the component you are referring to:

> [source, typescript]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, TypeScript]
```

----
@query('#dialog')
private dialog!: DialogElement;
----

Note the `!` sign used in the property declaration.
It is a https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/release-notes/typescript-2-7.html#definite-assignment-assertions[definite assignment assertion]
operator.

> This way we are telling the TypeScript compiler that `dialog` property is initialized indirectly, and therefore it does not need a default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tells the TypeScript compiler that the `dialog` property is initialized indirectly and does not need a default value.
```

=== Renderer Functions [[renderer-functions]]

Some Vaadin components like Grid and Dialog allow to pass the `<template>` element and then use it to stamp the content.

> This API is not compatible with lit-html, so in LitElement-based views we recommend using `renderer` functions instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This API is not compatible with lit-html. Use `renderer` functions in LitElement-based views instead.
```

Renderer function is a class method that accepts one or several arguments.

> In order to access them without TypeScript warnings, you need to get them properly typed by importing and using corresponding type declarations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access them without TypeScript warnings, you need to get them typed by importing and using the corresponding type declarations:
```

> [source, typescript]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, TypeScript]
```

layout: page
---

= TypeScript Definitions of Components

> [role="com.vaadin:vaadin@V17"]#Vaadin components come with TypeScript definitions# helping to use web components in TypeScript views.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V17]#Vaadin components come with TypeScript definitions# helping to use web components in TypeScript views.
```

Oops, I accidentally used incorrect syntax here.

It is a TypeScript interface describing the properties available on the `model`, including `index`.
We also use `GridColumnElement` declaration.

See also the https://vaadin-ts-examples.herokuapp.com/grid-column-renderer[full example] of using
`renderer` functions on the Grid columns, including some aspects related to making `this` work in
renderers.
There are similar examples for https://vaadin-ts-examples.herokuapp.com/select-renderer[Select],
https://vaadin-ts-examples.herokuapp.com/dialog-renderer[Dialog], https://vaadin-ts-examples.herokuapp.com/context-menu-renderer[Context Menu]
and https://vaadin-ts-examples.herokuapp.com/notification-renderer[Notification] components.

=== Event Listeners [[event-listeners]]

When using event listeners in LitElement-based views, we might want to get the reference to the event target and then access its value.
One common case for this is handling a `change` event.

While we typically only use one listener per element, the lit-html syntax for binding listeners does
not let TypeScript know what type of component it is, so we should care about it ourselves:

> [source, typescript]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, TypeScript]
```

}
----

We use `as` syntax, which is a https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/basic-types.html#type-assertions[type assertion], often called a "type cast".
It is a hint for the TypeScript compiler forcing it to use the type that we provide.
In this case we are confident about the type, but generally type casts should be avoided.

> === Custom Events [[custom-events]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V19"]
=== Custom Events [[custom-events]]
```

These versioning badge roles do not work standalone. They need to be attached to a heading, paragraph, sentence, or an open block (asciidoc concept). See https://github.com/vaadin/docs/wiki/Authoring-articles#indicating-new-and-deprecated-features for examples.

> [role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V19"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Vaadin components offer the set of type definitions for custom events making it easier to use them in TypeScript.
In particular, this allows to get proper type for the `detail` property, which has type of `any` by default.
To use the event types, you need to import them manually:

[source, typescript]
----
import type { TextFieldInvalidChanged } from '@vaadin/vaadin-text-field';

render() {
  return html`
    <vaadin-text-field @invalid-changed="${this.onInvalidChanged}"></vaadin-text-field>
  `
}

onInvalidChanged(event: TextFieldInvalidChanged) {
  // `detail` is an object with boolean `value` property.
  console.log(event.detail.value);
}
----

> NOTE: type definitions for custom events are currently available for these components:

Reviewer 2: NIT: This listing would age quickly. Need to remember to update it regularly, or alternatively, not have it list the components separately.

Author: I didn't have any ideas how to make it better but hopefully for V20 we will be able to remove it altogether.

> NOTE: type definitions for custom events are currently available for these components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Type definitions for custom events are available for these components:
```
Avoid unnecessary admonitions. 

If you do use them, prefer to use the `[NOTE]` syntax, as that doesn’t trip the Vale check for “use lowercase letter after semicolon”. And always add a title for the admonition to improve scan-ability. And lastly, admonitions should be standalone in the sense that a user should not be required to read them to understand what follows before or after them.

For example:

```asciidoc
.Not available for all components
[NOTE]
Type definitions for custom events are not available for all components. See ... for more information.

often called a "type cast". It is a hint for the TypeScript compiler forcing it to use the type that
we provide. In this case we are confident about the type, but generally type casts should be avoided.

=== Custom events [[custom-events]]

[role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V19"]

Vaadin components offer the set of type definitions for custom events making it easier to use them in TypeScript.
In particular, this allows to get proper type for the `detail` property, which has type of `any` by default.
To use the event types, you need to import them manually:

[source, typescript]
----
import type { TextFieldInvalidChanged } from '@vaadin/vaadin-text-field';

render() {
  return html`
    <vaadin-text-field @invalid-changed="${this.onInvalidChanged}"></vaadin-text-field>
  `
}

onInvalidChanged(event: TextFieldInvalidChanged) {
  // `detail` is an object with boolean `value` property.
  console.log(event.detail.value);
}
----

> NOTE: as of Vaadin 19, type definitions for custom events are available for these components:

Reviewer: Is this line needed, as there is already [role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V19"] above?

Author: Thanks, updated.
